Llnl edits (#156)
ExaWorks/job-api-spec: specification.md

## Introduction

> The purpose of this document is to propose and provide an analysis of the design and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this document is to provide an analysis of the design and
```

implementation issues of a job management API suitable for managing jobs
on exascale machines. A job
management API is a set of interfaces that allow the specification and

> management of application executables. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
management of the invocation of application executables. The
```

corresponding implementation of a job management API is a job management
library. A job management library, through its  API,  is invoked by a
client application.

Traditionally, job management is implemented on supercomputers by local

> resource managers (LRMs), such as PBS/Torque, Slurm, etc. A job management API can be understood as an abstraction layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource managers (LRMs), such as PBS/Torque, Slurm, etc. To a first approximation, a job management API can be understood as an abstraction layer
```

on top of various LRMs.

Job management is sometimes also provided by execution managers, with
capabilities similar to LRMs but operating in user space on a limited
subset of resources such as within a job's allocation.  This job

> management API aims to transparently abstract such execution managers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
management API aims to also transparently abstract such execution managers.
```

implementation in order to minimize the amount of work needed to write such an
implementation.

Specifically, the following aspects have significantly informed the design:

- **The interface is meant to be minimal** and focused on submitting and managing
jobs. Functionality outside that envelope, such as aggregating
information about cluster queuing systems, simplifying the composition of jobs
handled by the API, or the design of non API user interfaces, are all beyond the
scope of this specification.

- The proposed API is intended to be used by higher level tools, such as (but
not limited to) workflow systems. While it can be used directly by end users,
**user friendliness is not prioritized** over other
goals, such as scalability.

- **The proposed API is asynchronous**. A detailed discussion about the choice
between synchronous and asynchronous APIs can be found in [Appendix
B](#appendix-b---synchronous-vs-asynchronous-api). In short, the implementation
of a synchronous API would not scale well in most languages. Additionally, if so
needed, the API provides a [`wait()`](#job-wait) method that allows client code
to trivially implement a synchronous wrapper around the API.

> - **Bulk versions of calls have been considered.** Bulk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bulk versions of calls have been considered. Bulk
```

> calls facilitate the use of more efficient mechanisms for transmitting job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main reason for having bulk calls is to facilitate the use of more 
efficient mechanisms for transmitting job
```

information to an underlying implementation. However, alternative methods exist

> that do not require a bulk calls. Nonetheless, adding bulk calls to enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that do not require bulk calls. Nonetheless, adding bulk calls to enable
```

- Assumes that the jobs and client application have access to a common
filesystem.

- Assumes that the client application is executed in an environment that
has direct access (i.e., does not require authentication) to a local LRM.

### Layer 1 (remote)

> - Specifies remote locations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adds the specification of remote job submission locations
```

- Provides remote capabilities including:

    - A service and remote invocation protocol

    - Authentication and authorization

    - Encryption

- Enables file staging

- Allows for standard output/error streaming

- Enables file cleanup (an alternative and perhaps more flexible way of doing
this is to implement pre- and post-jobs in Layer 0)

> - Requires user mapping: if a system-wide service is deployed, there must be a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User mapping may be required if a system-wide service is deployed.  In other words, a
```

```

Returns the name of this executor. The name should be something simple

> but sufficiently informative, such as  "SLURM," "PBS,"  "Condor," or
> "AWS."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but sufficiently informative, such as  "SLURM", "PBS", "Condor", or
"AWS".
```

List<String> list()
```

Returns a list of native job IDs known to this executor instance.
  
The returned list MAY contain IDs of jobs which were not submitted via this
instance, and MAY be missing IDs of jobs which have been submitted by this

> instance but have been finalized and purged already. The returned job IDs MUST be a
> uniquely identified job in the scope of the `JobExecutor` instance and thus in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instance but have been finalized and purged already. The returned job IDs must uniquely identify each job in the scope of the `JobExecutor` instance and thus in the
```

scope of the backend that `JobExecutor` is bound to, but should not be assumed
to be unique beyond that scope.

IDs for any job which has been submitted via this instance and which is not yet
in a final state MUST be returned. Information for jobs in a final state may get

> purged by the backend, and the implementation MAY purge that information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
purged by the backend, and the implementation may also purge that information.
```

void attach(Job job, String nativeJobID)
```

> This method will accept a job instance in `NEW` state and a native job ID. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Associates a Job object with a native job.

This method will accept a job instance in the `NEW` state and a native job ID. 
```

transitions can also be received via callbacks

An implementation MUST ensure that job state transitions occur according to the
following state model:  
  - A job is created in an initial state `NEW`.  
  - When the job is accepted by the backend for execution, it will enter the state `QUEUED`.
  - When the job is being executed and consumes resources, it enters the `ACTIVE`
state.
  - Upon completion, it will enter the `COMPLETED` state which is a final
state.

At any point in time until the job is final, the job can enter the `FAILED`
state on error conditions. That state is also reached when the job completes
execution with an error code, but can also indicate a backend error or
a library error of any kind. The `FAILED` state is final.

At any point in time until the job is final, the job can enter the `CANCELED`

> state as reaction to the `job.cancel()` call. Note that the state transition to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state as a reaction to the `job.cancel()` call. Note that the state transition to
```

only occurs once the backend is enacting that request.

The `ACTIVE` state is the only state where the job will consume resources.

Backend implementations are likely to have their own state definitions state and
transition semantics. An implementation of this API MUST ensure that:

  - Backend states are mapped to the states defined in this document
  - State transitions are valid with respect to the state model here defined

An implementation MUST NOT issue state updates for any backend state transitions
which cannot be mapped to the state model. When a backend state model misses
a representation for a state which the state model requires,
the implementation MUST report the respective state transition anyway, to the
best of its knowledge. For example, if a `JobExecutor` backend does not, for some
reason, feature a state corresponding to `QUEUED`, then the implementation
MUST issue a `QUEUED` state update between `NEW` and `ACTIVE` anyway.

Additional information (timestamps, backend details, transition triggers etc.)
MAY be available on certain state transitions, in certain implementations. See
the `JobStatus` definition for additional information on such metadata.

> ##### Constructors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Constructors
```

the above constructor, the job will be in the `NEW` state.

> ##### Methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Methods
```

        attributes: JobAttributes = None)
```

> Creates a constructor for `JobSpec` which allows properties to be initialized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates an instance of `JobSpec` which allows properties to be initialized
```

List<String>? getArguments()
```

Sets/gets the argument list to be passed to the executable. 

> Unlike with

Reviewer: Will reformat separately

int? getNodeCount()
```

> Sets/gets the node count. If specified, allocates this number of nodes for

Reviewer: ... or rather "should have been" than "was"

> Sets/gets the node count. If specified, allocates this number of nodes for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sets/gets the node count. 

If specified, the implementation must instruct the LRM to allocate this number of nodes for
```

<img width="300pt" src="diagrams/bulk_submission_bulk.svg" alt="Bulk Jobs Timing Diagram"/>

> `send(job_data[])` indicates that we are now sending an array of

Reviewer: Not sure. The "where" is pretty standard to introduce a definition/explanation after a formula/diagram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `send(job_data[])` indicates that we are now sending an array of
```
